---
layout: post
title: Linux Commands
abbrlink: 4673811f44bb4146a3a953304ef26ede
tags: []
categories:
  - Programming
date: 1738063687495
updated: 1739440476377
---

## Command Line Basics

### Opening the Terminal

- Press `Ctrl+Alt+T` to open the terminal.

***

## Working with Directories

### Checking Your Current Directory

- Use `pwd` to display the current directory.

#### Notes:

- When the path is `~`, it means the CLI is in the home directory.

### Navigating Directories

- `cd` – Change directories:
  - `cd ~` → Takes you to your home directory.
  - `cd ..` → Goes back one folder.
  - `cd ../..` → Moves up multiple folders.
- `ls` – Show the contents of a directory.
  - Use `ls --help` to see available options.
  - Example: `ls -la`
    - `l` → Lists detailed information.
    - `a` → Shows all files, including hidden ones.
    - Hidden files start with `.` and are not visible in most GUIs by default.

***

## File & Directory Management

### Creating & Removing Files and Directories

- `mkdir <directory_name>` → Create a new directory.
- `touch file.txt` → Create a file named **file.txt**.
  - **Note:** If the file exists, `touch` updates its timestamp.
- `rm file.txt` → Remove **file.txt**.
  - **Note:** Use `rm -r <directory_name>` to remove directories.

### Copying & Moving Files

- `cp file.txt <directory_name>` → Copy **file.txt** to the specified directory.
- `mv file.txt <new_location>` → Move **file.txt** to a new location.
  - **Note:** Rename the file while moving it:\
    `mv file.txt new_directory/new_name.txt`.

### Viewing & Editing Files

- `nano file.txt` → Open **file.txt** for editing.
- `cat file.txt` → Display the contents of **file.txt**.
- `head file.txt -n <#>` → Show the first `<#>` lines of **file.txt**.
- `tail file.txt -n <#>` → Show the last `<#>` lines of **file.txt**.

***

## File Permissions

### Understanding File Permissions

- **d** → Directory
- **r** → Read
- **w** → Write
- **x** → Execute

***

## Networking Commands

- `ss -at` → See active servers.
- `ssh <user@host>` → Connect to a remote host via SSH.
- `apt search <package>` → Search for software in the OS repository.
- `sudo apt update` → Update software package lists.
- `sudo apt upgrade` → Upgrade installed packages.
- `cat /etc/apt/sources.list` → View software repository sources.
- `sudo apt remove <package>` → Uninstall a package.
- `sudo apt autoremove` → Remove obsolete dependencies.

### Managing Apache2 HTTP Server

- `systemctl status apache2.service` → Check the status of the Apache server.

***

## Using `apt` (For Linux Systems)

### Updating Package Lists

```sh
sudo apt update
```

### Installing a New Package

```sh
sudo apt install apache2
```

### Upgrading Installed Packages

```sh
sudo apt upgrade
```

### Cleaning Up Unused Packages

```sh
sudo apt autoremove
```
